Add package vignette (#31)
AlexsLemonade/mbSSP: vignettes/classify-with-mbssp.Rmd

This vignette will introduce the usage of these two classifiers including how to prepare input data, and also provides some information about how the classifiers were trained.

For clarity in this vignette, we'll refer to all functions and datasets in the package using the `mbSSP::object` syntax.

## Preparing your data

Classifiers take as input a gene-by-sample expression matrix, where rows are genes labeled with Ensembl gene identifiers and columns are labeled with unique sample ids.

The specific type of expression values needed depends on the associated technology.
This is due to the pair-based approach the classifiers taken when comparing expression values; all expression values _within a sample_ must accurately reflect relative expression values within that sample.
As such, we recommend the following:

* If the data is from bulk RNA-seq or full-length scRNA-seq, TPM values should be used to account for gene-length bias 
* If the data is from scRNA-seq with 3' bias (e.g., 10x Chromium), gene expression counts can be used.

> This is because we do not expect gene-length bias to play a major role with data from this technology.

Reviewer: Not just us -- 10x thinks this too 😜 [link](https://kb.10xgenomics.com/s/article/115003684783-Should-I-calculate-TPM-RPKM-or-FPKM-instead-of-counts-for-10x-Genomics-data)

Author: Ahh I missed this before merging since I focused on your other comment. I would like to link this in the vignette so will ~open a quick smol PR to do so~ include this link in the pkgdown PR!

Regardless of the underlying technology, it is fine to apply data transformations that do not influence the _rank_ of values within a sample, e.g., log transformation would be acceptable. 

### Predicting on scRNA-seq data

> If you plan to predict subtypes from scRNA-seq data (as opposed to bulk RNA-seq), you should first create a pseudobulk version of the data for input.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you plan to predict sample-level subtypes from scRNA-seq data (as opposed to bulk RNA-seq), you should first create a pseudobulk version of the data for input.
```

Reviewer: I want to raise this comment for discussion including @jaclyn-taroni 

Does this vignette also want to cover predicting subtypes of individual cells?

Reviewer 2: I think we can decide whether to add the filtering based on gene-detection bit to the package, and if so, it makes sense to me to cover predicting subtypes of individual cells. I don't think we necessarily want to tell people to use this on 10X data without that.

Reviewer: Yea good point. This sounds like we should create a new issue to cover that additional functionality and later updates to vignette. With that understanding I will move to approve this PR!

Original single-cell expression data is publicly available from GEO via the [accession id `GSE119926`](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE119926), and more information about the included samples is available in the included data frame `pseudobulk_metadata`: 

```{r}
head(mbSSP::pseudobulk_metadata)
```

Notably, no Smart-Seq2 samples were included in the classifier training data, so we don't expect that the classifiers are biased in favor of this technology.

### Predicting using the kTSP classifier

We'll begin with an example of using the kTSP classifier to label the pseudobulk data using the `classify_ktsp()` function.
This function wraps `multiclassPairs::predict_one_vs_rest_TSP()`, specifying the following arguments:

* `tolerate_missed_genes = TRUE`: Gene-pair rules associated with missing genes will not be considered.
This ensures that the input data does not need to contain all genes in the classifier,

> which allows for increased analysis flexibility and applicability to more input data

Reviewer 2: I feel like this might be my fault from an earlier suggestion
```suggestion
This ensures that the input data does not need to contain all genes in the classifier, which allows for increased analysis flexibility and applicability to more input data.
```

> * `weighted_votes = TRUE`: For final class score calculations, gene-pair rules will be weighted by their scores to give more weight to the more informative (i.e., higher scoring) rules

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `weighted_votes = TRUE`: For final class score calculations, gene-pair rules will be weighted by their scores to give more weight to the more informative (i.e., higher scoring) rules.
```

```{r}
head(ktsp_results$class_df)
```

In this example case, we have the true sample subtypes available in the package dataset `pseudobulk_metadata`, so we can assess classifier performance:

```{r}
compare_df <- ktsp_results$class_df |>
  # combine predicted and true labels
  dplyr::left_join(pseudobulk_metadata, by = c("sample_id" = "sample_name")) |>
  # rename for clarity
  dplyr::rename(
    predicted_subtype = class_assignment, 
    known_subtype = subtype
  )

# Calculate a confusion matrix and associated statistics
caret::confusionMatrix(
  # prediction
  data = compare_df$predicted_subtype, 
  # truth
  reference = compare_df$known_subtype
)
```

This unweighted kTSP predictor shows a very high accuracy, with only a single `G4` sample misclassified as `G3`.

### Predicting using the RF classifier

Next, we'll classify samples in `pseudobulk_data_mat` using the weighted RF classifier using the `classify_rf()` function.
This function wraps `multiclassPairs::predict_RF()`, specifying the following non-default arguments:

* `impute = TRUE`: Expression for missing genes should be imputed. 
This ensures that the input data does not need to contain all genes in the classifier,

> which allows for increased analysis flexibility and applicability to more input data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This ensures that the input data does not need to contain all genes in the classifier, which allows for increased analysis flexibility and applicability to more input data.
```

---
title: "Classifying MB samples with mbSSP"
output: rmarkdown::html_vignette
vignette: >
  %\VignetteIndexEntry{getting_started}
  %\VignetteEngine{knitr::rmarkdown}
  %\VignetteEncoding{UTF-8}
---

```{r, include = FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(
  collapse = TRUE,
  comment = "#>"
)
```

```{r setup}
library(mbSSP)
```

## Introduction

> The `mbSSP` package ("**M**edullo**b**lastoma **S**ingle **S**ample **P**redictor) provides two classifiers to label Medulloblastoma subtypes including `WNT`, `SHH`, `G3`, and G4` from expression data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `mbSSP` package ("**M**edullo**b**lastoma **S**ingle **S**ample **P**redictor) provides two classifiers to label Medulloblastoma subtypes including `WNT`, `SHH`, `G3`, and `G4` from expression data.
```

> Two complementary classifiers are provided:

Reviewer 2: What would you say makes them complementary exactly? I could see this being construed as meaning you could/should use them at the same time.

Author: >  I could see this being construed as meaning you could/should use them at the same time.

I hadn't thought of it that way, but this is a good point! The use of the word "complementary" here was mostly a nicer-sounding way to say "different," which as the less loaded word is perhaps actually the nicer one.

This vignette will introduce the usage of these two classifiers including how to prepare input data, and also provides some information about how the classifiers were trained.

For clarity in this vignette, we'll refer to all functions and datasets in the package using the `mbSSP::object` syntax.

## Preparing your data

Classifiers take as input a gene-by-sample expression matrix, where rows are genes labeled with Ensembl gene identifiers and columns are labeled with unique sample ids.

The specific type of expression values needed depends on the associated technology.
This is due to the pair-based approach the classifiers taken when comparing expression values; all expression values _within a sample_ must accurately reflect relative expression values within that sample.
As such, we recommend the following:

* If the data is from bulk RNA-seq or full-length scRNA-seq, TPM values should be used to account for gene-length bias 
* If the data is from scRNA-seq with 3' bias (e.g., 10x Chromium), gene expression counts can be used.
This is because we do not expect gene length bias to play a major role with data from this technology.

> Regardless of the underlying technology, it is fine to apply data transformations that do not influence the _rank_ of values within a sample, e.g. log transformation would be acceptable. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Regardless of the underlying technology, it is fine to apply data transformations that do not influence the _rank_ of values within a sample, e.g., log transformation would be acceptable. 
```

### Predicting on scRNA-seq data

> If you plan to predict subtypes from scRNA-seq data (vs from bulk RNA-seq), you should first create a pseudobulk version of the data for input.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you plan to predict subtypes from scRNA-seq data (as opposed to bulk RNA-seq), you should first create a pseudobulk version of the data for input.
```

> The pseuobulked data should contain aggregated gene expression values across cells and be treated as a single sample. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The pseudobulked data should contain aggregated gene expression values across cells and be treated as a single sample. 
```

Original single-cell expression data is publicly available from GEO via the [accession id `GSE119926`](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE119926), and more information about the included samples is available in the included data frame `pseudobulk_metadata`: 

```{r}
head(mbSSP::pseudobulk_metadata)
```

Notably, no Smart-Seq2 samples were included in the classifier training data, so we don't expect that the classifiers are biased in favor of this technology.

### Predicting using the kTSP classifier

We'll begin with an example of using the kTSP classifier to label the pseudobulk data using the `classify_ktsp()` function.
This function wraps `multiclassPairs::predict_one_vs_rest_TSP()`, specifying the following arguments:

* `tolerate_missed_genes = TRUE`: Rules associated with missing genes will not be considered.
This ensures that the input data does not need to contain all genes in the classifier,
which allows for increased analysis flexibility and applicability to more input data.
* `weighted_votes = TRUE`: Rules will be weighted by their scores such that more informative
(i.e., higher scoring) rules have a higher weight.

> By default, they functions run in verbose mode but you can silence some of the messaging with `verbose = FALSE`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, the functions run in verbose mode, but you can silence some of the messaging with `verbose = FALSE`.
```

```{r}
ktsp_results <- mbSSP::classify_ktsp(pseudobulk_data_mat)
```

From this output, we see that two genes (`ENSG00000121210` and `ENSG00000117600`) included in the rules for classifying `SHH` samples are not present in the provided expression matrix, but the classification is able to proceed nonetheless.

> We also see that no ties were found, suggesting confident predictions.

Reviewer 2: I would probably rephrase to say why, in fact, this is good news for predictions (i.e., whether or not a rule is true will be unambiguous).

Author: > i.e., whether or not a rule is true will be unambiguous

I'm not sure what you mean by this exactly, can you clarify a bit? Whether or not a _given_ gene-pair rule (if this is what you are referring to?) is true or not won't be obvious from just this output, but it will mean that there's a clear majority of rules in support of one or the other class.

`classify_ktsp()` returns a list of two items:

* `classifier_output`, the output from running `multiclassPairs::predict_one_vs_rest_TSP()`
* `class_df`, a data frame (tibble) of sample classifications and per-sample subtype scores with the following columns:
  * `sample_id`
  * `class_assignment`, one of `WNT`, `SHH`, `G3`, or `G4`

>   * A column for each of `WNT`, `SHH`, `G3`, and `G4` with the given subtype's score

Reviewer 2: I might say more about the score here, which I believe is just the proportion of a subtype's rules that are true

  
Let's have a look at the first few rows of the `class_df` data frame:

```{r}
head(ktsp_results$class_df)
```

In this example case, we have the true sample subtypes available in the package dataset `pseudobulk_metadata`, so we can assess classifier performance:

```{r}
compare_df <- ktsp_results$class_df |>
  # combine predicted and true labels
  dplyr::left_join(pseudobulk_metadata, by = c("sample_id" = "sample_name")) |>
  # rename for clarity
  dplyr::rename(
    predicted_subtype = class_assignment, 
    known_subtype = subtype
  )

# Calculate a confusion matrix and associated statistics
caret::confusionMatrix(
  # prediction
  data = compare_df$predicted_subtype, 
  # truth
  reference = compare_df$known_subtype
)
```

This unweighted kTSP predictor shows a very high accuracy, with only a single `G4` sample mis-classified as `G3`.

### Predicting using the RF classifier

Next, we'll classify samples in `pseudobulk_data_mat` using the weighted RF classifier using the `classify_rf()` function.
This function wraps `multiclassPairs::predict_RF()`, specifying the following non-default arguments:

> * `impute = TRUE`: Expression for missing genes should be imputed. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

* `impute = TRUE`: Expression for missing genes should be imputed. 
```

This ensures that the input data does not need to contain all genes in the classifier,
which allows for increased analysis flexibility and applicability to more input data.

Other arguments to `multiclassPairs::predict_RF()` can be overridden as desired. 
By default, `classify_rf()` runs in verbose mode but you can silence some of the messaging with `verbose = FALSE`.

```{r}
rf_results <- mbSSP::classify_rf(pseudobulk_data_mat)
```
From this output, we see (similar to the `classify_ktsp()` output) that several genes included in the classifier samples are not present in the provided expression matrix, but the classification is able to proceed nonetheless.

Like the kTSP classifier, `classify_rf()` returns a list of two items:

> * `classifier_output`, the output from running `multiclassPairs::predict_one_vs_rest_TSP()`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `classifier_output`, the output from running `multiclassPairs::predict_RF()`
```

Author: copy/paste strikes again!

This vignette will introduce the usage of these two classifiers including how to prepare input data, and also provides some information about how the classifiers were trained.

For clarity in this vignette, we'll refer to all functions and datasets in the package using the `mbSSP::object` syntax.

## Preparing your data

Classifiers take as input a gene-by-sample expression matrix, where rows are genes labeled with Ensembl gene identifiers and columns are labeled with unique sample ids.

The specific type of expression values needed depends on the associated technology.
This is due to the pair-based approach the classifiers taken when comparing expression values; all expression values _within a sample_ must accurately reflect relative expression values within that sample.
As such, we recommend the following:

* If the data is from bulk RNA-seq or full-length scRNA-seq, TPM values should be used to account for gene-length bias 
* If the data is from scRNA-seq with 3' bias (e.g., 10x Chromium), gene expression counts can be used.

> This is because we do not expect gene length bias to play a major role with data from this technology.

Reviewer 2: Consistency
```suggestion
This is because we do not expect gene-length bias to play a major role with data from this technology.
```

### Predicting using the kTSP classifier

We'll begin with an example of using the kTSP classifier to label the pseudobulk data using the `classify_ktsp()` function.
This function wraps `multiclassPairs::predict_one_vs_rest_TSP()`, specifying the following arguments:

* `tolerate_missed_genes = TRUE`: Gene-pair rules associated with missing genes will not be considered.
This ensures that the input data does not need to contain all genes in the classifier,
which allows for increased analysis flexibility and applicability to more input data
* `weighted_votes = TRUE`: For final class score calculations, gene-pair rules will be weighted by their scores to give more weight to the more informative (i.e., higher scoring) rules

By default, the functions run in verbose mode, but you can silence some of the messaging with `verbose = FALSE`.

```{r}
ktsp_results <- mbSSP::classify_ktsp(pseudobulk_data_mat)
```

From this output, we see that two genes (`ENSG00000121210` and `ENSG00000117600`) included in the rules for classifying `SHH` samples are not present in the provided expression matrix, but the classification is able to proceed nonetheless.

> We also see that no ties were found, which gives us confidence in the results because it means that the underlying gene-pair rules decisively support the classification.

Author: Took a stab at some rephrase here, but not sure it actually addressed the review. Please have a look and let me know?

> We also see that no ties were found, which gives us confidence in the results because it means that the underlying gene-pair rules decisively support the classification.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We also note that no ties were found, which lends confidence to the results, as it indicates that the underlying gene-pair rules decisively support the classification.
```

`classify_ktsp()` returns a list of two items:

* `classifier_output`, the output from running `multiclassPairs::predict_one_vs_rest_TSP()`
* `class_df`, a data frame (tibble) of sample classifications and per-sample class scores with the following columns:
  * `sample_id`
  * `class_assignment`, one of `WNT`, `SHH`, `G3`, or `G4`
  * A column for each of `WNT`, `SHH`, `G3`, and `G4` with the given class' score.
  This score represents proportion of gene-pair rules that predict the given class out of all rules in the classifier.

>   Since we specify `weighted_votes = TRUE`, each gene-pair rule is weighted by its score so that more important rules have a higher contribution

Author: For re-review, this phrasing could definitely use another set of eyes, since it's not quite the number of rules out of total due to the weighting

Reviewer 2: I've looked at the docs (and a little bit of the source code), and I'm genuinely not sure if this wording is clear. Tagging @envest for another opinion.

Reviewer: 👋 I agree this is a bit murky. I think some of my confusion comes from handling two different scores in the same thought. There is the gene-pair score (which is its importance), and the score given for each class. I think removing one of the scores may be helpful...

Since we are already making the `weighted_votes = TRUE` decision for the user, including that technical detail could be another off-ramp for somebody reading about it. But also nice to make that assumption explicit. Not sure.

```suggestion
  This score represents the weighted proportion of gene-pair rules that predict the given class out of all rules in the classifier.
  Each gene-pair rule's contribution is weighted by its own importance so that more important rules have a higher contribution.
```
